README.md, before:

# RTSN - an HPC Radio Therapy $`S_n`$ framework
TBD 
## What RTSN is capable of
### Theory
TBD
### Examples
TBD

---

## Build
### Required dependencies
 - Compiler with C++20 support (e.g. g++ v9)
 - cmake >= v3.12.4
 - LAPACK
 - OpenMP
 - MPI
 - VTK
 - git
 - ninja or make

### Obtain submodules
Note that an **active internet connection is required for the first build** in order to download the latest versions of the required submodules!
For the first build only, download all submodules:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Compile the code
**Make** build system (available on most systems)
 
```bash 
cd code/build/release
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../../
make 
```
If building in parallel is desired, change the last line to `make -jN`, where `N` optimally is equal to the number of available threads+1.

**Ninja** build system:

```bash 
cd code/build/release
cmake -G Ninja -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../../
ninja
```


The resulting executable will automatically be placed in the `code/bin` folder.

---

## Run
### Local
Execute the compiled binary and hand over a valid *TOML*-styled config file.
Example:

```bash
./bin/RTSN input/example.toml
```

In order to run the code in parallel execute:

```bash
OMP_NUM_THREADS=N mpirun -np J ./bin/RTSN input/example.toml
```

with `N` equal to the number of shared memory threads and `J` equal to the number of distrubuted memory threads.

### BwUniCluster
Example for build and run on bwUniCluster.
```bash
git clone https://git.scc.kit.edu/rtsn/rtsn.git
cd rtsn/
git submodule init
git submodule update
module load devel/cmake/3.16
module load compiler/gnu/9.2
module load mpi/openmpi/4.0
cd code/build/release/
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../../
make
./../../bin/RTSN ../../input/example.toml
```

---

## Tests
In order to also compile the unit tests, add `-DBUILD_TESTING=True` to the cmake command, e.g.:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DBUILD_TESTING=True ../../
```

The resulting `unit_tests` executable will also be placed in `/bin`.

## Continuous Integration (CI)
TBD

---

## Code structure
![Can't load image](doc/uml.png "UML diagram")
<br/><br/>
The diagram can be modified by opening `doc/uml.zargo` with `ArgoUML`.

---

## Coding style
Please stick to the following coding style for easier code readability:

 - class variables start with an underscore and lowercase letters e.g. `_foo`
 - functions start with a capital letter e.g. `GetSettings()`
 - any variable/function names have capital letters at each individual word e.g. `GetAllCellsAdjacentTo(Cell i)`

Please also use the provided `code/.clang-format` style format to format your code before pushing your latest commits.
Some editors offer to automatically apply the style format upon saving a file (e.g. `Qtcreator`).

Commit message:

added reverse engineered current state uml diagram

README.md, after:

# RTSN - an HPC Radio Therapy $`S_n`$ framework
TBD 
## What RTSN is capable of
### Theory
TBD
### Examples
TBD

---

## Build
### Required dependencies
 - Compiler with C++20 support (e.g. g++ v9)
 - cmake >= v3.12.4
 - LAPACK
 - OpenMP
 - MPI
 - VTK
 - git
 - ninja or make

### Obtain submodules
Note that an **active internet connection is required for the first build** in order to download the latest versions of the required submodules!
For the first build only, download all submodules:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Compile the code
**Make** build system (available on most systems)
 
```bash 
cd code/build/release
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../../
make 
```
If building in parallel is desired, change the last line to `make -jN`, where `N` optimally is equal to the number of available threads+1.

**Ninja** build system:

```bash 
cd code/build/release
cmake -G Ninja -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../../
ninja
```


The resulting executable will automatically be placed in the `code/bin` folder.

---

## Run
### Local
Execute the compiled binary and hand over a valid *TOML*-styled config file.
Example:

```bash
./bin/RTSN input/example.toml
```

In order to run the code in parallel execute:

```bash
OMP_NUM_THREADS=N mpirun -np J ./bin/RTSN input/example.toml
```

with `N` equal to the number of shared memory threads and `J` equal to the number of distrubuted memory threads.

### BwUniCluster
Example for build and run on bwUniCluster.
```bash
git clone https://git.scc.kit.edu/rtsn/rtsn.git
cd rtsn/
git submodule init
git submodule update
module load devel/cmake/3.16
module load compiler/gnu/9.2
module load mpi/openmpi/4.0
cd code/build/release/
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../../
make
./../../bin/RTSN ../../input/example.toml
```

---

## Tests
In order to also compile the unit tests, add `-DBUILD_TESTING=True` to the cmake command, e.g.:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DBUILD_TESTING=True ../../
```

The resulting `unit_tests` executable will also be placed in `/bin`.

## Continuous Integration (CI)
TBD

---

## Code structure
**WARNING: is not created automatically - might be out of date!**
Reverse engineered plantuml diagram of the current code structure: 
![Can't load image](doc/rtsn.svg "UML diagram")
<br/><br/>
Was created using [hpp2plantuml](https://github.com/thibaultmarin/hpp2plantuml) and [plantuml](https://plantuml.com/), e.g.:
```bash
cd code
hpp2plantuml -i "../code/include/*.h" -o rtsn.puml 
plantuml rtsn.puml -tsvg
```

---

## Coding style
Please stick to the following coding style for easier code readability:

 - class variables start with an underscore and lowercase letters e.g. `_foo`
 - functions start with a capital letter e.g. `GetSettings()`
 - any variable/function names have capital letters at each individual word e.g. `GetAllCellsAdjacentTo(Cell i)`

Please also use the provided `code/.clang-format` style format to format your code before pushing your latest commits.
Some editors offer to automatically apply the style format upon saving a file (e.g. `Qtcreator`).
